# Demographic identity and diversity in the choice of cooking fuel: evidence from post-earthquake Nepal

### Abstract
> Demand for and access to different types of cooking fuels can vary substantially across ethnic groups, income classes, locations, or other demographic subgroups. Yet, this issue of diversity in fuel choice across different population subgroups has not received much attention, nor has the issue of diversity within subgroups. In this paper, using data collected in the aftermath of Nepal’s 2015 earthquake (n = 747,137 households), we construct a link between households’ choice of cooking fuels and their sociodemographic identities. We then employ permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) and find that ethnicity explains the highest between-group diversity (39.1%) in fuel choice, followed by income class (26.3%), education level (12.6%), and geo-climatic location (4.1%). An interaction between any two demographic factors contributes less than 3.5% of total variation. Grouping households along ethnic lines also engenders subgroups with both the highest and the lowest diversity (measured by Shannon index) in fuel choice. These results underscore the importance of policy interventions based on ethnicity, rather than other factors, in promoting more equal access to clean cooking and in identifying the most vulnerable segment of the population to unexpected fuel supply disruptions.

### Dataset
Following the 7.8 Mw Gorkha Earthquake in Nepal on April 25, 2015, the Kathmandu Living Labs in collaboration with the National Planning Commission (the Government of Nepal), carried out the largest household survey ever done in Nepal using mobile technology. Although the primary objective of this survey was to assess damages inflicted by the quake and identify beneficiaries eligible for government’s housing reconstruction grants, the data contain many other kinds of valuable socio-economic information, including the types of fuel used by households for cooking and lighting from 11 of the most earthquake-affected districts of Nepal, excluding the Kathmandu valley. 

The data for all 11 districts were downloaded from the **2015 Nepal Earthquake: Open Data Portal** (<http://eq2015.npc.gov.np/>). 

<br/><br/>